playbooks/planning/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: blueprinting
description: Plan-and-Solve methodology for goal decomposition and blueprint creation
triggers:
  - "plan"
  - "blueprint"
  - "decompose"
  - "analyze goal"
  - "break down"
  - "plan-and-solve"
---

# Blueprinting Skill: Plan-and-Solve Methodology

This skill teaches the **Plan-and-Solve** methodology for decomposing goals into executable blueprints. It is based on research from "Plan-and-Solve Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language Models" (Wang et al., 2023).

## The Core Insight

Most failures in complex tasks come from starting execution too early. The Plan-and-Solve methodology addresses this by enforcing thorough planning before any action is taken.

```
Traditional Approach:        Plan-and-Solve Approach:
─────────────────────        ───────────────────────

Goal → Act → Fail → Retry    Goal → Plan → Verify Plan → Act → Succeed
         ↑______|                         ↑_____|
         (loops)                          (validates)
```

## The Three Planning Phases

Plan-and-Solve operates in three distinct phases:

### Phase 1: Variable Extraction

Before planning, identify all variables in the problem:

**Inputs**: What do we have to work with?
- Existing code, files, resources
- User requirements and constraints
- Available tools and capabilities
- Time and scope limitations

**Outputs**: What must we produce?
- Files, code, configurations
- Documentation, tests
- State changes, side effects
- User-visible results

**Constraints**: What limits our approach?
- Technical constraints (language, framework)
- Architectural constraints (patterns, conventions)
- Resource constraints (time, dependencies)
- Quality constraints (tests, documentation)

**Dependencies**: What depends on what?
- External dependencies (packages, APIs)
- Internal dependencies (modules, data)
- Temporal dependencies (order of operations)
- Logical dependencies (preconditions)

### Phase 2: Intermediate Calculation

Before finalizing the plan, work through the middle:

**Gap Analysis**: What's the delta between current and desired state?
```
Current State: No user registration
Desired State: Working registration endpoint
Gap: Need schema, service, controller, route, tests
```

**Complexity Assessment**: How hard is each part?
- Trivial: Single file, known pattern
- Simple: Few files, clear approach
- Moderate: Multiple files, some decisions
- Complex: Many files, significant decisions
- Ambitious: System-wide, architectural impact

**Risk Identification**: What could go wrong?
- Technical risks (approach might not work)
- Integration risks (parts might not fit)
- External risks (dependencies might fail)
- Quality risks (might not meet standards)

**Path Selection**: Which approach is best?
- Consider multiple approaches
- Evaluate trade-offs
- Select based on constraints and risks
- Document why this path was chosen

### Phase 3: Step-by-Step Planning

Decompose into atomic, verifiable steps:

**Atomic**: Each step does exactly one thing
```
Bad:  "Create the user system"
Good: "Create User interface in src/models/user.ts with id, email, name fields"
```

**Verifiable**: Each step has clear success criteria
```
Bad:  "The model should be correct"
Good: "File exists, exports User interface, includes required fields, passes type check"
```

**Ordered**: Steps are in executable sequence
```
Step 1: Create schema (no dependencies)
Step 2: Create service (depends on schema)
Step 3: Create controller (depends on service)
Step 4: Create route (depends on controller)
```

**Recoverable**: Failed steps can be addressed
```
If step fails: Try alternative approach
If no alternative: Roll back to checkpoint
If critical: Escalate for replanning
```

## The Blueprint Structure

A complete blueprint follows this structure:

```yaml
blueprint:
  # HEADER - Identifies and summarizes
  id: "unique identifier"
  goal: "exact goal statement"
  created_at: "timestamp"
  estimated_complexity: "trivial|simple|moderate|complex|ambitious"

  # ANALYSIS - What we learned from variable extraction
  analysis:
    summary: "1-2 sentence approach summary"
    inputs: [list of inputs with sources]
    outputs: [list of outputs with locations]
    constraints: [list of constraints with impacts]
    risks: [list of risks with mitigations]
    assumptions: [list of assumptions made]

  # STEPS - The actual plan
  steps:
    - id: "step_1"
      name: "short name"
      action: "detailed description"
      rationale: "why this step"
      inputs: [what it needs]
      outputs: [what it produces]
      success_criteria: [how to verify]
      failure_modes: [what could go wrong]
      depends_on: [dependencies]
      tools_required: [tools needed]

  # CHECKPOINTS - Recovery points
  checkpoints:
    - after_step: "step_id"
      name: "checkpoint name"
      verification: [what to check]
      rollback_to: "step_id if failure"

  # TEMPERING CRITERIA - What must be verified
  tempering_criteria:
    must_verify: [critical requirements]
    quality_checks: [quality requirements]
```

## Success Criteria Design

Well-designed success criteria are specific and verifiable:

### The SMART Framework for Criteria

**Specific**: Exactly what must be true
```
Bad:  "Code works"
Good: "registerUser function returns User object on success"
```

**Measurable**: Can be objectively checked
```
Bad:  "Good performance"
Good: "Response time under 200ms for p95"
```

**Achievable**: Actually possible to accomplish
```
Bad:  "Perfect security"
Good: "Passwords hashed with bcrypt, cost factor 10+"
```

**Relevant**: Directly relates to the goal
```
Bad:  "Beautiful code formatting"
Good: "Follows existing code style conventions"
```

**Testable**: Can be verified automatically or manually
```
Bad:  "User experience is good"
Good: "Returns 201 on success, 400 on validation failure, 409 on duplicate"
```

### Verification Methods

Each criterion should specify how to verify it:

| Criterion Type | Verification Method |
|---------------|---------------------|
| File exists | `test -f path` or Glob |
| Export exists | `grep "export"` or import test |
| Function works | Unit test execution |
| Integration works | Integration test or manual test |
| Types correct | `tsc --noEmit` |
| Style correct | Linter execution |
| Tests pass | Test runner execution |

## Risk Mitigation Strategies

For each identified risk, plan mitigation:

### Risk Matrix

```
              │ Low Impact │ Med Impact │ High Impact │
──────────────┼────────────┼────────────┼─────────────┤
Low Prob.     │   Accept   │   Monitor  │   Mitigate  │
Med Prob.     │   Monitor  │   Mitigate │   Mitigate  │
High Prob.    │   Mitigate │   Mitigate │   Avoid     │
```

### Mitigation Approaches

**Accept**: Risk is tolerable, proceed without special handling
**Monitor**: Watch for signs, have response ready
**Mitigate**: Take proactive steps to reduce likelihood or impact
**Avoid**: Change approach to eliminate the risk

### Mitigation Examples

```yaml
risk:
  description: "Email validation regex may miss edge cases"
  probability: "medium"
  impact: "low"
  strategy: "mitigate"
  mitigation: "Use established email-validator package"
  contingency: "Fall back to simple format check"
```

## Dependency Mapping

Map dependencies to ensure correct execution order:

### Dependency Types

**Data Dependencies**: Output of one step is input to another
```
step_2.input = step_1.output
Therefore: step_2 depends_on step_1
```

**Resource Dependencies**: Shared resource must be ready
```
step_3 needs database connection
step_1 creates database connection
Therefore: step_3 depends_on step_1
```

**Logical Dependencies**: One thing must be true first
```
step_4 tests the API
step_3 creates the API
Therefore: step_4 depends_on step_3
```

### Dependency Visualization

```
step_1 ──┬──→ step_2 ──→ step_4
         │              ↗
         └──→ step_3 ──┘
```

Read as:
- step_2 depends on step_1
- step_3 depends on step_1
- step_4 depends on step_2 AND step_3

### Avoiding Circular Dependencies

Circular dependencies indicate a planning error:
```
step_1 → step_2 → step_3 → step_1  ← ERROR
```

Resolution:
1. Identify the cycle
2. Break it by splitting a step
3. Or reorder to eliminate the cycle

## Checkpoint Design

Checkpoints enable recovery and progress verification:

### When to Place Checkpoints

- After completing a logical unit of work
- Before high-risk steps
- At natural pause points
- After irreversible operations

### Checkpoint Structure

```yaml
checkpoint:
  after_step: "step_3"
  name: "Core implementation complete"
  description: "All business logic is in place"
  verification:
    - "Schema file exists and exports correctly"
    - "Service file exists and all methods work"
    - "Controller file exists and handles requests"
  rollback_to: "step_1"  # Where to restart if later steps fail
  state_to_preserve:
    - "All files created in steps 1-3"
    - "Any configuration changes"
```

### Checkpoint Benefits

1. **Recovery**: Can restart from checkpoint instead of beginning
2. **Verification**: Confirms partial progress
3. **Communication**: Shows progress to user
4. **Debugging**: Isolates where things went wrong

## Common Planning Pitfalls

### Pitfall 1: Vague Steps

```
Bad:  "Set up the database"
Good: "Create PostgreSQL migration at db/migrations/001_create_users.sql
       defining users table with columns: id (UUID), email (VARCHAR 255),
       password_hash (VARCHAR 255), created_at (TIMESTAMP)"
```

### Pitfall 2: Missing Dependencies

```
Bad:  Step 3 needs config that Step 5 creates
Good: Reorder so Step 5 comes before Step 3, or add explicit dependency
```

### Pitfall 3: Unverifiable Criteria

```
Bad:  "Code is clean and well-organized"
Good: "Passes eslint with zero errors, follows existing naming conventions"
```

### Pitfall 4: No Failure Handling

```
Bad:  No failure_modes specified
Good: Each step lists what could go wrong and how to recover
```

### Pitfall 5: Over-Planning

```
Bad:  50 steps for a simple feature
Good: Minimum steps needed, no unnecessary granularity
```

## The Planning Mindset

When blueprinting, adopt this mindset:

1. **Be thorough, not paranoid** - Cover important cases, not every edge case
2. **Be specific, not verbose** - Precise language, minimum words
3. **Be realistic, not optimistic** - Plan for what usually happens
4. **Be adaptive, not rigid** - The plan should guide, not constrain
5. **Be complete, not exhaustive** - Everything needed, nothing extra

## Verification Questions

Before finalizing a blueprint, ask:

- [ ] Could someone else execute this plan without asking questions?
- [ ] Is every step verifiable with clear criteria?
- [ ] Are all dependencies mapped correctly?
- [ ] Are risks identified with mitigations?
- [ ] Are checkpoints at logical recovery points?
- [ ] Does the plan match the original goal exactly?
- [ ] Is the tempering criteria complete and specific?

If any answer is "no," refine the blueprint.

---

*"A plan that cannot be verified is not a plan—it's a hope." - Blueprinting Principle*

Commit message:

Replace all metallurgic terminology with standard software terms
Term mapping applied:
- blueprint/blueprinting → plan/planning
- cast/caster/cast_id → task/builder/task_id
- forge/forging/forgemaster → build/building/builder
- temper/tempering/temperer → verify/verifying/verifier
- scribe → memory
- smith → planner
- brittle → unstable
- cracked → failed

Files renamed:
- blueprint.schema.json → plan.schema.json
- execution-ready-blueprint.schema.json → execution-ready-plan.schema.json
- cast-state.schema.json → task-state.schema.json
- cast-manifest.schema.json → task-manifest.schema.json
- forge-log.schema.json → build-log.schema.json
- temper-report.schema.json → verify-report.schema.json
- scribe-meta.schema.json → memory-meta.schema.json

Directory references updated:
- studio/casts/ → studio/tasks/

https://claude.ai/code/session_01Xhd1phvGkZcLWssvn6Tz7i

playbooks/planning/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: planing
description: Plan-and-Solve methodology for goal decomposition and plan creation
triggers:
  - "plan"
  - "plan"
  - "decompose"
  - "analyze goal"
  - "break down"
  - "plan-and-solve"
---

# Planing Skill: Plan-and-Solve Methodology

This skill teaches the **Plan-and-Solve** methodology for decomposing goals into executable plans. It is based on research from "Plan-and-Solve Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language Models" (Wang et al., 2023).

## The Core Insight

Most failures in complex tasks come from starting execution too early. The Plan-and-Solve methodology addresses this by enforcing thorough planning before any action is taken.

```
Traditional Approach:        Plan-and-Solve Approach:
─────────────────────        ───────────────────────

Goal → Act → Fail → Retry    Goal → Plan → Verify Plan → Act → Succeed
         ↑______|                         ↑_____|
         (loops)                          (validates)
```

## The Three Planning Phases

Plan-and-Solve operates in three distinct phases:

### Phase 1: Variable Extraction

Before planning, identify all variables in the problem:

**Inputs**: What do we have to work with?
- Existing code, files, resources
- User requirements and constraints
- Available tools and capabilities
- Time and scope limitations

**Outputs**: What must we produce?
- Files, code, configurations
- Documentation, tests
- State changes, side effects
- User-visible results

**Constraints**: What limits our approach?
- Technical constraints (language, framework)
- Architectural constraints (patterns, conventions)
- Resource constraints (time, dependencies)
- Quality constraints (tests, documentation)

**Dependencies**: What depends on what?
- External dependencies (packages, APIs)
- Internal dependencies (modules, data)
- Temporal dependencies (order of operations)
- Logical dependencies (preconditions)

### Phase 2: Intermediate Calculation

Before finalizing the plan, work through the middle:

**Gap Analysis**: What's the delta between current and desired state?
```
Current State: No user registration
Desired State: Working registration endpoint
Gap: Need schema, service, controller, route, tests
```

**Complexity Assessment**: How hard is each part?
- Trivial: Single file, known pattern
- Simple: Few files, clear approach
- Moderate: Multiple files, some decisions
- Complex: Many files, significant decisions
- Ambitious: System-wide, architectural impact

**Risk Identification**: What could go wrong?
- Technical risks (approach might not work)
- Integration risks (parts might not fit)
- External risks (dependencies might fail)
- Quality risks (might not meet standards)

**Path Selection**: Which approach is best?
- Consider multiple approaches
- Evaluate trade-offs
- Select based on constraints and risks
- Document why this path was chosen

### Phase 3: Step-by-Step Planning

Decompose into atomic, verifiable steps:

**Atomic**: Each step does exactly one thing
```
Bad:  "Create the user system"
Good: "Create User interface in src/models/user.ts with id, email, name fields"
```

**Verifiable**: Each step has clear success criteria
```
Bad:  "The model should be correct"
Good: "File exists, exports User interface, includes required fields, passes type check"
```

**Ordered**: Steps are in executable sequence
```
Step 1: Create schema (no dependencies)
Step 2: Create service (depends on schema)
Step 3: Create controller (depends on service)
Step 4: Create route (depends on controller)
```

**Recoverable**: Failed steps can be addressed
```
If step fails: Try alternative approach
If no alternative: Roll back to checkpoint
If critical: Escalate for replanning
```

## The Plan Structure

A complete plan follows this structure:

```yaml
plan:
  # HEADER - Identifies and summarizes
  id: "unique identifier"
  goal: "exact goal statement"
  created_at: "timestamp"
  estimated_complexity: "trivial|simple|moderate|complex|ambitious"

  # ANALYSIS - What we learned from variable extraction
  analysis:
    summary: "1-2 sentence approach summary"
    inputs: [list of inputs with sources]
    outputs: [list of outputs with locations]
    constraints: [list of constraints with impacts]
    risks: [list of risks with mitigations]
    assumptions: [list of assumptions made]

  # STEPS - The actual plan
  steps:
    - id: "step_1"
      name: "short name"
      action: "detailed description"
      rationale: "why this step"
      inputs: [what it needs]
      outputs: [what it produces]
      success_criteria: [how to verify]
      failure_modes: [what could go wrong]
      depends_on: [dependencies]
      tools_required: [tools needed]

  # CHECKPOINTS - Recovery points
  checkpoints:
    - after_step: "step_id"
      name: "checkpoint name"
      verification: [what to check]
      rollback_to: "step_id if failure"

  # VERIFYING CRITERIA - What must be verified
  verification_criteria:
    must_verify: [critical requirements]
    quality_checks: [quality requirements]
```

## Success Criteria Design

Well-designed success criteria are specific and verifiable:

### The SMART Framework for Criteria

**Specific**: Exactly what must be true
```
Bad:  "Code works"
Good: "registerUser function returns User object on success"
```

**Measurable**: Can be objectively checked
```
Bad:  "Good performance"
Good: "Response time under 200ms for p95"
```

**Achievable**: Actually possible to accomplish
```
Bad:  "Perfect security"
Good: "Passwords hashed with bcrypt, cost factor 10+"
```

**Relevant**: Directly relates to the goal
```
Bad:  "Beautiful code formatting"
Good: "Follows existing code style conventions"
```

**Testable**: Can be verified automatically or manually
```
Bad:  "User experience is good"
Good: "Returns 201 on success, 400 on validation failure, 409 on duplicate"
```

### Verification Methods

Each criterion should specify how to verify it:

| Criterion Type | Verification Method |
|---------------|---------------------|
| File exists | `test -f path` or Glob |
| Export exists | `grep "export"` or import test |
| Function works | Unit test execution |
| Integration works | Integration test or manual test |
| Types correct | `tsc --noEmit` |
| Style correct | Linter execution |
| Tests pass | Test runner execution |

## Risk Mitigation Strategies

For each identified risk, plan mitigation:

### Risk Matrix

```
              │ Low Impact │ Med Impact │ High Impact │
──────────────┼────────────┼────────────┼─────────────┤
Low Prob.     │   Accept   │   Monitor  │   Mitigate  │
Med Prob.     │   Monitor  │   Mitigate │   Mitigate  │
High Prob.    │   Mitigate │   Mitigate │   Avoid     │
```

### Mitigation Approaches

**Accept**: Risk is tolerable, proceed without special handling
**Monitor**: Watch for signs, have response ready
**Mitigate**: Take proactive steps to reduce likelihood or impact
**Avoid**: Change approach to eliminate the risk

### Mitigation Examples

```yaml
risk:
  description: "Email validation regex may miss edge cases"
  probability: "medium"
  impact: "low"
  strategy: "mitigate"
  mitigation: "Use established email-validator package"
  contingency: "Fall back to simple format check"
```

## Dependency Mapping

Map dependencies to ensure correct execution order:

### Dependency Types

**Data Dependencies**: Output of one step is input to another
```
step_2.input = step_1.output
Therefore: step_2 depends_on step_1
```

**Resource Dependencies**: Shared resource must be ready
```
step_3 needs database connection
step_1 creates database connection
Therefore: step_3 depends_on step_1
```

**Logical Dependencies**: One thing must be true first
```
step_4 tests the API
step_3 creates the API
Therefore: step_4 depends_on step_3
```

### Dependency Visualization

```
step_1 ──┬──→ step_2 ──→ step_4
         │              ↗
         └──→ step_3 ──┘
```

Read as:
- step_2 depends on step_1
- step_3 depends on step_1
- step_4 depends on step_2 AND step_3

### Avoiding Circular Dependencies

Circular dependencies indicate a planning error:
```
step_1 → step_2 → step_3 → step_1  ← ERROR
```

Resolution:
1. Identify the cycle
2. Break it by splitting a step
3. Or reorder to eliminate the cycle

## Checkpoint Design

Checkpoints enable recovery and progress verification:

### When to Place Checkpoints

- After completing a logical unit of work
- Before high-risk steps
- At natural pause points
- After irreversible operations

### Checkpoint Structure

```yaml
checkpoint:
  after_step: "step_3"
  name: "Core implementation complete"
  description: "All business logic is in place"
  verification:
    - "Schema file exists and exports correctly"
    - "Service file exists and all methods work"
    - "Controller file exists and handles requests"
  rollback_to: "step_1"  # Where to restart if later steps fail
  state_to_preserve:
    - "All files created in steps 1-3"
    - "Any configuration changes"
```

### Checkpoint Benefits

1. **Recovery**: Can restart from checkpoint instead of beginning
2. **Verification**: Confirms partial progress
3. **Communication**: Shows progress to user
4. **Debugging**: Isolates where things went wrong

## Common Planning Pitfalls

### Pitfall 1: Vague Steps

```
Bad:  "Set up the database"
Good: "Create PostgreSQL migration at db/migrations/001_create_users.sql
       defining users table with columns: id (UUID), email (VARCHAR 255),
       password_hash (VARCHAR 255), created_at (TIMESTAMP)"
```

### Pitfall 2: Missing Dependencies

```
Bad:  Step 3 needs config that Step 5 creates
Good: Reorder so Step 5 comes before Step 3, or add explicit dependency
```

### Pitfall 3: Unverifiable Criteria

```
Bad:  "Code is clean and well-organized"
Good: "Passes eslint with zero errors, follows existing naming conventions"
```

### Pitfall 4: No Failure Handling

```
Bad:  No failure_modes specified
Good: Each step lists what could go wrong and how to recover
```

### Pitfall 5: Over-Planning

```
Bad:  50 steps for a simple feature
Good: Minimum steps needed, no unnecessary granularity
```

## The Planning Mindset

When planing, adopt this mindset:

1. **Be thorough, not paranoid** - Cover important cases, not every edge case
2. **Be specific, not verbose** - Precise language, minimum words
3. **Be realistic, not optimistic** - Plan for what usually happens
4. **Be adaptive, not rigid** - The plan should guide, not constrain
5. **Be complete, not exhaustive** - Everything needed, nothing extra

## Verification Questions

Before finalizing a plan, ask:

- [ ] Could someone else execute this plan without asking questions?
- [ ] Is every step verifiable with clear criteria?
- [ ] Are all dependencies mapped correctly?
- [ ] Are risks identified with mitigations?
- [ ] Are checkpoints at logical recovery points?
- [ ] Does the plan match the original goal exactly?
- [ ] Is the verifying criteria complete and specific?

If any answer is "no," refine the plan.

---

*"A plan that cannot be verified is not a plan—it's a hope." - Planing Principle*
